##The Indifferent Photograph

On December 12th, 2013 Liora Hess received a package in the mail. Opening up a box postmarked from Sweden, she found a small device about the size of a postage stamp.[1] After flipping through the user’s manual and charging the gadget, she clipped it to her blouse and headed out of her stuccoed studio in outer Los Angeles. She had just bought a Narrative Clip, one of the first "lifelogging" cameras to be released for consumer use. Throughout the day the camera automatically took a picture every thirty seconds, capturing her eating sushi with her boyfriend Doug and following up on a Craiglist ad for exotic cacti in downtown LA. On her way home she stopped by the Higashi Honganji Buddhist Temple where, remembering the instructions in the user manual, she double tapped the front of the device to capture parts of the courtyard she found particularly striking. Upon arriving back home, Liora uploaded the photos onto her laptop which were soon pushed to an application on her phone. There, lined up in chronological order, was a photographic journal of her day; Doug grabbing a bite of her salad, a tortoise she almost stepped on at the cacti nursery, Bakan Lama waiving her goodbye from the temple. She quickly discovered a feature called “Moment Trim” which selected images with new faces and favorable lighting, and grouped them together in an attempt to isolate the moments in her day. The feature was surprisingly effective in narrowing down noteworthy pictures, but she found that it didn’t include all the images she thought were interesting. After more searching through the minutiae of her day, Liora got sleepy and set the Narrative Clip facedown on her desk, turning it off. What she had just put down was not simply a novelty gadget, but part of a new wave of lifelogging devices that have been finding homes in a fast-growing community of people committed to recording and cataloging every aspect of their everyday life.

For much of the 80s and 90s, lifelogging was a fringe hobby of the technological savvy, pioneered by the Canadian inventor Steve Mann, who since the late 1970s has been wearing a permanently fixed video camera, that records and wirelessly transmits video twenty-four-seven.[2] Deemed the “father of wearable computing”,[3] Mann’s cyborg-like devices became increasingly less wiry and more portable over the years, inspiring others to follow suit. By 2003, Microsoft had released an experimental wearable camera about the size of a smart-phone that was worn around the neck as a lanyard.[4] Still in the confines of tech giants’ research labs and MIT doctoral experiments, lifelogging cameras started to pique the interest of the general public, and by 2012, a Swedish company named Memoto (later renamed to Narrative) had been founded and was on its way to producing one of the first commercial wearable cameras. Backed by a half-million dollar Kickstarter campaign, Memoto launched a camera in late 2013, joining the company of Autographer, another wearable lifelogging camera that had been released earlier in the year. Not isolated phenomena, these lifelogging cameras are part of a wider movement of digital self-recording and self-tracking known as the Quantified Self movement.

In 2007, Wired Magazine editors Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly introduced the term “quantified self” as a “collaboration of users and tool makers who share an interest in self knowledge through self-tracking.”[5] Over the past eight years the term has blossomed into a movement with communities of “self-quantifiers” in 112 cities around the world.[6] Using the online platform Meetup, they regularly get together for talks and demonstrations of new software and devices that allow them to better track and record their lives. From recording sleep patterns to calories, photographs to moods, the QS community is committed to quantifying and logging their behaviors and habits, in order to gain an increased self-awareness. The Narrative Clip is closely tied with the Quantified Self movement and is even listed as a supporter of QS on the community's main website,[7] however, the movement as a whole extends beyond the photographic leanings of the Narrative, and connects together people from joggers to bio-hackers, all seeking to use technology to track and archive their everyday activities. As a manifestation of this movement, the Narrative Clip presents a moment where photography is being adapted and redefined to fit a new desire to constantly self-record. In its new form, on the blouses and lapels of the technologically literate, lifelogging cameras like the Narrative Clip are changing the way we take pictures and the way we think about them as well.

Traditionally, photography is the act of framing the world in a way that portrays the photographer's expectations or desires about the way things should look. Susan Sontag speaks to this in her seminal essay, *In Plato's Cave*, where she notes, "even when photographers are most concerned with mirroring reality, they are still haunted by tacit imperatives of taste and conscience. The immensely gifted members of the Farm Security Administration photographic project of the the late 1930s (among them Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, Ben Shahn, Russell Lee) would take dozens of frontal pictures of one of their sharecropper subjects until satisfied that they had gotten just the right look on film -- the precise expression on the subject's face that supported their own notions about poverty, light, dignity, exploitation, and geometry."[8] In this light, photography appears as not merely a reduplication of the world but a conscious framing of it that puts forth certain imperatives about the way it should be perceived. This type of deliberate, message-focused photography seems to stand in opposition to the photographs the Narrative Clip takes. With the Narrative, the camera takes pictures by itself, its frame determined not by a steady hand, but the whim of the lapel which it is clipped to. It is a photography that is fascinated with recording and cataloging everything, for the sake of having everything, and not in order to produce beautiful, artistic, or politically-charged visions of the world. What can be seen emerging are two distinct forms of photography; one which can be called the *agentic*, is the intentional, artistic, frame-oriented photography that Sontag points to, where the photographer has agency over the photograph and its semantic potential. The other form, which can be called the *archival*, is a photography based on using photos as a means to catalog, remember, and archive parts of the world. It is a photography which takes away emphasis from the act of taking the picture, and puts it instead on a mass accumulation of images to remember the world by. This distinction showed it self to Sontag as well, who compared "virtuosi of the noble image like Alfred Stieglitz and Paul Strand, composing mighty, unforgettable photographs decade after decade," to "the Polaroid owner for whom photographs are a handy, fast form of note-taking, or the shutter-bug with a Brownie who takes snapshots as souvenirs of daily life."[9] It is not that these two types of photography are new, but that with the increasing miniaturization and portability of photographic devices - emblematized by the advent of the Narrative Clip - the gap between them has grown dramatically.

Cellphones with built-in cameras have become a standard in the past ten years, and thus have allowed a large majority of populations constant access to a photographic device. Along with birthing the social phenomenon of the selfie, this widespread exposure has led people to use cameras more frequently, and in new ways. Presently, it is common occurrence for people to take a picture of a bus schedule, recipe, or advertisement as a way of remembering something they would have otherwise used a written note for. Whereas before digital photography, images - save that of the Polaroid's - would have taken hours or days to be processed, now photographs can be instantly taken and available on the same device that is used for all other major communications. On top of this, there is no longer the sense that every picture taken is an economic expenditure. Whereas twenty years ago, people may have been prudent about what pictures they took and when, today, photographs are taken freely, without the moderation and intentionality that felt necessary when each picture was an expense. This change has taken archival photography from the niche enclaves of museum cataloging and Polaroid-enthusiasts, and turned it into a widespread cultural practice. The Narrative Clip is the farthest extension of this movement, and an eye into the ways in which photography is increasingly being transformed into a tool for memory.

On the Narrative website, a large tag-line covers the home page:

*A new kind of photographic memory: The Narrative Clip is a tiny, automatic camera and app that gives you a searchable and shareable photographic memory.*[10]

The emphasis of the device it seems, is not to function as a traditional camera, but instead to produce "automatic" pictures that can make up a "photographic memory." The creators behind Narrative want users to clip the camera on and forget about it for the rest of the day. A little further down on the page another line reads: "you won't even notice it's there." Whereas agentic photography puts the camera into the forefront, focusing on how it is framing the subject, the archival photography being popularized by Narrative diminishes the role of the camera as much as possible. It is instead a constant memory-capturing device whose mission is to make the wide, and often mundane expanses of our day, "searchable and shareable." In the search for memory then, photography becomes less about capturing images, and more about retrieving them. As the case of Liora Hess showed, the user of the Narrative Clip at the end of the day plugs the camera into the computer, whereby the photos are downloaded and sent to an application on their phone. There, organized chronologically, are thousands of images, separated into time blocks the application's smart algorithms view as distinct "moments." The real task of the user then, is not to take pictures, but to look back at them. Photography ceases to be about capturing photos at all, and turns into a database that people look back into when they want to remember something. Whereas twenty or thirty years ago the activity of the art photographer and the Polaroid snap shooter could without hesitation both be called photography, today devices like the Narrative are posing problems for this seemingly monolithic category. It seems that by turning photography into an act of retrieval, lifelogging cameras are transforming the camera into less of a device, and more of an organ.

Like human memory, the Narrative Clip constantly takes in and stores information. Whereas the point and shoot camera needs to be put between the eye and the action - an interruption within daily experience - the Narrative constantly captures what is going on, without requiring the user to stop what they are doing. In talking about the way tourists take pictures, Sontag writes, "most tourists feel compelled to put the camera between themselves and whatever is remarkable that they encounter...[the] photograph is not just the result of an encounter between an event and a photographer; picture taking is an event in itself..."[11] Sontag shows how the very act of photographing requires a distancing of the self from the action - it is an event that removes one from the action they are attempting to capture. The Narrative Clip on the other hand is always on and thus indifferently records experience as it unfolds. As the company's website proclaims: "Capture the moment as it happens, without interference. Complement your staged photos of majestic scenery with the intensity of the small moments that matter the most."[12] This line creates a divide between "staged" agentic photography and the spontaneous archival photography of the Narrative, while suggesting that the device should not be used as tool, but instead a way of living life more "intens[ly]." In this way, the Narrative is set up to be an appendage of the body that allows us to have an even richer memory. With the increasing portability of technology, the camera itself has blurred the line between instrument and organ and is becoming a permanent fixture of how people are perceiving and remembering their everyday life.

Gordon Bell, a principal researcher at Microsoft, was one of the first proponents of lifelogging and digitizing memory. In 1998, he initiated a project called MyLifeBits, where he set out to scan every photo, file, receipt, and scrap that he owned.[13] As the paper all became bits he turned to recording every moment of his life, in the hopes of creating a complete "e-memory." Using a lifelogging camera he began to see image capturing as a way to augment and improve the faulty human memory. In his 2009 book *Total Recall*, co-authored with another Microsoft researcher Jim Gemmell, Bell writes, "in our brains, memory, attention, and emotion conspire to warp, compress, and edit time and life experience in many ways. A video camera, the eye of an e-memory, in contrast, never blinks or winces, never drifts into a daydream or does a double take. A camera will record an hour of pedestrian crosswalk traffic with same fidelity as it will witness an hour of bloody genocide."[14] This shocking contrast serves to show Bell's unerring belief that images can provide us with an un-biased, true, representation of what we have experienced. This line of thought seems in accord with the Narrative Clip's rhetoric of not just being a camera, but creating a photographic memory that can tell us exactly what we were doing on a certain day, that can help us "capture, store, and relive [the] special moments,"[15] that we might have otherwise forgotten. What both Bell and Narrative have in common is the belief that lifelogging photography gives us more intense memories that help us feel more connected to our pasts and to our selves. Upon closer examination though, it appears that these very devices that are meant to archive and intensify our memories, in many ways do the opposite instead.

By taking pictures by itself, not directed by any intentional framing, the Narrative Clip takes blurry, skewed renditions of one's surrounding, often capturing things they actually did not see. Instead of intensifying memories, the photos add in elements that were never a part of the experience and thus produce a memory which usually does not feel aligned with what actually occurred. Whereas at first glance it would seem that lifelogging cameras, which take thousands of photos per day, would be the ideal way to capture and store memories, the actual images they produce are dispassionate and do not feel like they live up to the experience they are trying to portray. In the case of agentic photography, the photographer purposefully takes a photo because of its emotional value, and frames it in a way that brings out that desired feeling. The Narrative Clip most of the time lacks any agent, and while capturing almost every moment of the day, fails to instill images with a staying power. The danger of this is that while users may at first feel like they are taking more control of their memory, the memories they are increasingly relying on are dispassionate and in a way, estranging. This un-deliberate and automatic form of photography is not merely limited to lifeloggging cameras but something that is being practiced more and more with the growing affordability and portability of cameras. People have begun to capture their entire lives through hastily shot iPhone photos, recording important moments with a type of photography that devalues the emotional status of the photograph. Non-agentic, rapid, and focused on mass accumulation, this photography has made pictures less "special" and therefore the moments they represent too. In the present age of image inundation, it is necessary to be wary about the ways we take pictures and how certain types of photography make us more indifferent about the world, than enchanted by it. Susan Sontag's warning that, "ultimately, having an experience becomes identical with taking a photograph of it,"[16] is even more salient now, in a world that photographs everything and has let the camera frame itself. 


**Citations:**

[1] Story adapted from a blog post by Liora Hess: "24 Hours with the Narrative Clip," accessed November 17th, 2014, http://liorahess.com/blog/24-hours-with-the-narrative-clip/.

[2] "Steve Mann: My 'Augmediated' Life," accessed December 17th, 2014, http://spectrum.ieee.org/geek-life/profiles/steve-mann-my-augmediated-life.

[3] "Wearable computing pioneer Steve Mann: Who watches the watchmen?" accessed December 17th, 2014, http://www.techhive.com/article/2040837/wearable-computing-pioneer-steve-mann-who-watches-the-watchmen-.html.

[4] "SenseCam: Questions and Answers," accessed on December 17th, 2014, http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/cambridge/projects/sensecam/questions.htm#question7.

[5] "Quantified Self," accessed on December 17th, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantified_Self.

[6] "Quantified Self: About," accessed on November 29th, 2014, http://quantifiedself.com/about/.

[7] "Friends of Quantified Self," accessed on November 29th, 2014, http://quantifiedself.com/friends/. 

[8] Susan Sontag, "In Plato's Cave," in *On Photography* (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977), 3-24.

[9] Sontag, "In Plato's Cave," 6.

[10] "Narrative Clip Home Page," accessed on December 17th, 2014, http://getnarrative.com/.

[11] Sontag, "In Plato's Cave," 11.

[12] "Narrative Clip Home Page."

[13] "Gordon Bell: The Uploaded Life," accessed on December 17th, 2014, http://techonomy.com/conf/12-tucson/data-science-2/gordon-bell-the-uploaded-life/

[14] Gordon Bell and Jim Gemmell, *Total Recall: How the E-memory Revolution Will Change Everything* (New York: Dutton, 2009), 56.

[15] "Narrative Clip Home Page."

[16] Sontag, "In Plato's Cave," 24.
