###Archive of the Self: First Draft

On December 12th, 2013 Liora Hess received a package in the mail. Opening up a box postmarked from Sweden, she found a small device about the size of a postage stamp. After flipping through the user’s manual and charging the gadget, she clipped it to her blouse and headed out of her stuccoed studio in outer Los Angeles. She had just bought a Narrative Clip, one of the first wearable cameras to be released for consumer use. Throughout the day the camera automatically took a picture every thirty seconds, capturing her eating sushi with her boyfriend Craig and following up on a Craiglist ad for exotic cacti in downtown LA. On her way home she stopped by the Higashi Honganji Buddhist Temple where, remembering the instructions in the user manual, she double tapped the front of the device to capture parts of the courtyard she found particularly striking. Upon arriving back home, Liora uploaded the photos onto her laptop which were soon pushed to an app on her phone. There, lined up in chronological order, was a photographic journal of her day; Craig grabbing a bite of her salad, a tortoise she almost stepped on at the cacti nursery, Bakan Lama waiving her goodbye from the temple. She quickly discovered a feature called “Moment Trim” which selected images with new faces and favorable lighting, and grouped them together in an attempt to isolate the moments in her day. The feature was surprisingly effective in narrowing down noteworthy pictures but she found that it didn’t include all the images she thought were interesting. After more searching through the minutiae of her day, Liora got sleepy and set the Narrative Clip facedown on her desk, turning it off. What Liora had just put down was not simply a novelty gadget, but part of a new wave of lifelogging devices that have been finding homes in a fast-growing community of people committed to recording and cataloging every aspect of their everyday life. 

For much of the 80s and 90s, lifelogging was a fringe hobby of the technological savvy, pioneered by the Canadian inventor Steve Mann, who since 1980 has been wearing a permanently fixed video camera, that records and wirelessly transmits video twenty-four-seven. Deemed the “father of wearable computing”, Mann’s cyborg-like devices became increasingly less wiry and more portable over the years, inspiring others to follow suit. By the 2004, Microsoft had a released an experimental wearable camera about the size of a smart-phone that was worn around the neck as a lanyard. Still in the confines of tech giants’ research labs and MIT doctoral experiments, lifelogging cameras started to pique the interest of the general public, and by 2012, a Swedish company named Memoto had been founded and was on its way to producing the one of the first commercial wearable cameras. Backed by a half-million dollar Kickstarter campaign, Memoto launched a camera in late 2013, joining the company of Autographer, another wearable lifelogging camera that had been released earlier in the year. Not isolated phenomena, these lifelogging cameras are part of a wider movement of digital self-recording that has become known as the Quantified Self movement.

In 2007, Wired Magazine editors Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly introduced the term “quantified self” as a “collaboration of users and tool makers who share an interest in self knowledge through self-tracking.” Over the past eight years the term has blossomed into a movement with communities of “self-quantifiers” in 112 cities around the world. Using the online platform Meetup, they regularly get together for talks and demonstrations of new software and devices that allow them to better track and record their lives. From recording sleep patterns to calories, photographs to moods, the QS community is committed to quantifying and logging their behaviors and habits, in order to have an increased self-awareness. As a manifestation of this movement the Narrative Clip presents a moment where photography is being changed to fit a new need of constant self-archiving. **In its new form, on the blouses and lapels of the technologically literate, lifelogging cameras like the Narrative Clip are changing the way we take pictures and the way we think about them as well.**


Questions:

1) Does talking about the QS movement open up a can of worms that distracts from discussing photography and how it is being reworked by Narrative?
2) How should I work through Sontag piece? Should I use Narrative ad material and then analyze it through Sontag? 
3) How can I bring up the history of lifelogging without sounding journalistic? I am writing for Cabinet, not Wired.
4) Is it what I’m arguing that photography has become less about saving the special moments in life (i.e. its origins in wedding/family pictures) but about surveying your everyday life? The difference is subtle but important: whereas before we look out to snap the important moments (a la Sontag), now we snap everything and go back and review them, picking out the ones we like. Culture of retrieval instead of action. **We are using photography as memory more than ever.**


Sources:

http://liorahess.com/blog/24-hours-with-the-narrative-clip/
http://quantifiedself.com/



