###Working Title: The Indifferent Photograph

On December 12th, 2013 Liora Hess received a package in the mail. Opening up a box postmarked from Sweden, she found a small device about the size of a postage stamp. After flipping through the user’s manual and charging the gadget, she clipped it to her blouse and headed out of her stuccoed studio in outer Los Angeles. She had just bought a Narrative Clip, one of the first "lifelogging" cameras to be released for consumer use. Throughout the day the camera automatically took a picture every thirty seconds, capturing her eating sushi with her boyfriend Doug and following up on a Craiglist ad for exotic cacti in downtown LA. On her way home she stopped by the Higashi Honganji Buddhist Temple where, remembering the instructions in the user manual, she double tapped the front of the device to capture parts of the courtyard she found particularly striking. Upon arriving back home, Liora uploaded the photos onto her laptop which were soon pushed to an app on her phone. There, lined up in chronological order, was a photographic journal of her day; Doug grabbing a bite of her salad, a tortoise she almost stepped on at the cacti nursery, Bakan Lama waiving her goodbye from the temple. She quickly discovered a feature called “Moment Trim” which selected images with new faces and favorable lighting, and grouped them together in an attempt to isolate the moments in her day. The feature was surprisingly effective in narrowing down noteworthy pictures, but she found that it didn’t include all the images she thought were interesting. After more searching through the minutiae of her day, Liora got sleepy and set the Narrative Clip facedown on her desk, turning it off. What Liora had just put down was not simply a novelty gadget, but part of a new wave of lifelogging devices that have been finding homes in a fast-growing community of people committed to recording and cataloging every aspect of their everyday life. (give source)

For much of the 80s and 90s, lifelogging was a fringe hobby of the technological savvy, pioneered by the Canadian inventor Steve Mann, who since 1980 has been wearing a permanently fixed video camera, that records and wirelessly transmits video twenty-four-seven (give source). Deemed the “father of wearable computing” (give source), Mann’s cyborg-like devices became increasingly less wiry and more portable over the years, inspiring others to follow suit. By the 2004, Microsoft had a released an experimental wearable camera about the size of a smart-phone that was worn around the neck as a lanyard (give source). Still in the confines of tech giants’ research labs and MIT doctoral experiments, lifelogging cameras started to pique the interest of the general public, and by 2012, a Swedish company named Memoto (later renamed to Narrative) had been founded and was on its way to producing one of the first commercial wearable cameras. Backed by a half-million dollar Kickstarter campaign, Memoto launched a camera in late 2013, joining the company of Autographer, another wearable lifelogging camera that had been released earlier in the year. Not isolated phenomena, these lifelogging cameras are part of a wider movement of digital self-recording and self-tracking known as the Quantified Self movement.

In 2007, Wired Magazine editors Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly introduced the term “quantified self” as a “collaboration of users and tool makers who share an interest in self knowledge through self-tracking.” (give source) Over the past eight years the term has blossomed into a movement with communities of “self-quantifiers” in 112 cities around the world (source). Using the online platform Meetup, they regularly get together for talks and demonstrations of new software and devices that allow them to better track and record their lives. From recording sleep patterns to calories, photographs to moods, the QS community is committed to quantifying and logging their behaviors and habits, in order to gain an increased self-awareness. The Narrative Clip is closely tied with the Quantified Self movement and is even listed as a supporter of QS on the community's main website (http://quantifiedself.com/friends/), however the movement as a whole extends beyond the photographic leanings of the Narrative, and connects together people from joggers to bio-hackers, all seeking to use technology to track and archive their everyday activities. As a manifestation of this movement, the Narrative Clip presents a moment where photography is being adapted and redefined to fit a new desire to constantly self-record. In its new form, on the blouses and lapels of the technologically literate, lifelogging cameras like the Narrative Clip are changing the way we take pictures and the way we think about them as well.

Traditionally, photography is the act of framing the world in a way that portrays the photographer's expectations or desires about the way things should look. Susan Sontag speaks to this in her seminal book, *On Photography*, where she notes, "even when photographers are most concerned with mirroring reality, they are still haunted by tacit imperatives of taste and conscience. The immensely gifted members of the Farm Security Administration photographic project of the the late 1930s (among them Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, Ben Shahn, Russel Lee) would take dozens of frontal pictures of one of their sharecropper subjects until satisfied that they had gotten just the right look on film -- the precise expression on the subject's face that supported their own notions about poverty, light, dignity, exploitation, and geometry." (Sontag, 6) In this light, photography appears as not merely a reduplication of the world but a conscious framing of it that puts forth certain imperatives about the way it should be perceived. This type of deliberate, message-focused photography seems to stand in opposition to the photographs the Narrative Clip takes. With the Narrative, the camera takes pictures by itself, its frame determined not by a steady hand, but the whim of the lapel which it is clipped to. It is a photography that is fascinated with recording and cataloging everything, for the sake of having everything, and not in order to produce beautiful, artistic, or politically-charged visions of the world. What can be seen emerging are two distinct forms of photography; one which can be called the *agentic*, is the intentional, artistic, frame-oriented photography that Sontag points to, where the photographer has *agency* over the photograph and its semantic potential. The other form, which can be called the *archival*, is a photography based on using photos as a means to catalog, remember, and archive parts of the world. It is a photography which takes away emphasis from the act of taking the picture, and puts it instead on a mass accumulation of images to remember the world by. This distinction showed it self to Sontag as well who compared "virtuosi of the noble image like Alfred Stieglitz and Paul Strand, composing mighty, unforgettable photographs decade after decade," to "the Polaroid owner for whom photographs are a handy, fast form of note-taking, or the shutter-bug with a Brownie who takes snapshots as souvenirs of daily life." (Sontag, 6) It is not that this these two types of photography are new, but that with the increasing miniaturization and portability of photographic devices - emblematized by the advent of the Narrative Clip - the gap between them has grown wider. 

Cellphones with built in cameras have become a standard in the past ten years, and thus have allowed a large majority of populations constant access to a photographic device. Along with birthing the social phenomenon of the selfie, this widespread exposure has led people to use cameras more frequently and in new ways. Presently, it is common occurrence for people to take a picture of a bus schedule, recipe, or advertisement as a way of remembering something they would have otherwise used a written note for. Whereas before digital photography, images - save that of the Polaroid's - would have taken hours or days to be processed, now photographs can be instantly taken and available on the same device that is used for all other major communications. On top of this, there is no longer the sense that every picture taken is an economic expenditure. Whereas twenty years ago, people may have been prudent about what pictures they took and when, in our current moment, photographs are being taken as if they are no longer a commodity. This change has taken archival photography from the niche enclaves of museum cataloging and Polaroid-enthusiasts, and turned it into a widespread cultural practice. The Narrative Clip is the farthest extension of this movement, and an eye into the ways in which photography is being transformed into a tool for memory.

On the Narrative website, a large tag-line covers the home page:

*A new kind of photographic memory: The Narrative Clip is a tiny, automatic camera and app that gives you a searchable and shareable photographic memory.*

The emphasis of the device it seems, is not to function as a traditional camera, but instead to produce "automatic" pictures that can make up a "photographic memory." The creators behind Narrative want users to clip the camera on and forget about it for the rest of the day. A little further down on the page another line reads: "you won't even notice it's there." Whereas agentic photography puts the camera into the forefront, focusing on how it is framing the subject, the archival photography being popularized by Narrative diminishes the role of the camera as much as possible. It is instead a constant memory-capturing device whose mission is to make the wide, and often mundane expanses of our day, "searchable and shareable." In the search for memory then, photography becomes less about capturing images, and more about retrieving them. As the case of Liora Hess showed, the user of the Narrative Clip at the end of the day plugs the camera into the computer, whereby the photos are downloaded and sent to an application on their phone. There, organized chronologically, are thousands of images, separated into time blocks the application's smart algorithms view as distinct "moments." The real task of the user then, is not to take pictures, but to look back at them. Photography ceases to be about capturing photos at all, and turns into a database that people look back into when they want to remember something. Whereas twenty or thirty years ago the activity of the art photographer and the Polaroid snap shooter could without hesitation both be called photography, today devices like the Narrative are posing problems for this seemingly monolithic category. It seems that by turning photography into an act of retrieval, lifelogging cameras are transforming the camera into less of a device, and more of an organ.

Like human memory, the Narrative Clip constantly takes in and stores information. Whereas the point and shoot camera needs to be put between the eye and the action - an interruption within daily experience - the Narrative constantly captures what is going on, without requiring the user to stop what they are doing. In talking about the way tourists take pictures, Sontag writes, "most tourists feel compelled to put the camera between themselves and whatever is remarkable that they encounter...[the] photograph is not just the result of an encounter between an event and a photographer; pictures taking is an event in itself..." (Sontag, 11) Sontag shows how the very act of photographing requires a distancing of the self from the action - it is an event that removes one from the action they are attempting to capture. The Narrative Clip on the other hand is always on and thus indifferently records experience as it unfolds. As the company's website proclaims: "Capture the moment as it happens, without interference. Complement your staged photos of majestic scenery with the intensity of the small moments that matter the most." (Give source) This line sets up a divide between "staged" agentic photography and the spontaneous archival photography of the Narrative, while suggesting that the device should not be used as tool, but instead a way of living life more "intens[ly]." In this way the Narrative is set up to be an appendage of the body that allows us to have an even richer memory. With increasing portability of technology, the camera itself has blurred the line between instrument and organ and is becoming a permanent fixture of how people are perceiving and remembering their everyday life.


**Bring up total recall, introduce Bell, show how this archival photography is dangerous because it creates dislocated, false memories.**

Now launch a critique of these photos, that actually these photos give a sort of false memory.

Talk about total recall and how it is pushing towards a false totality. As Sontag shows photography hides more than it discloses, and further than this narrative/archival photography adds things to your memory that you didn't see. Different non-emotional memory. archival photography creates an ARCHIVAL MEMORY and thus makes Memory becomes banal. Empty of significance. Memory becomes pictures of the floor. The search for total memory actually makes it banal.

Creates total recall, is actually a banal totality, false totality.




















It is a photography that stems from the desire to record everything, not only allowing one to collect the world, but sense some sort of ownership over it as well. 
In this form, it is the more-or-less unguided reduplication of the photographed subject, its insertion into a bank of other photos, that serves as the motus operandi, and not an emphasis on a particular semantic message


In the traditional sense photography, for Susan Sontag, is a deliberate way of imposing taste and certain interpretation of the world. In her famous essay on the subject she writes, "even when photographers are most concerned with mirroring reality, they are still haunted by tacit imperatives of taste and conscience. The immensely gifted members of the Farm Security Administration photographic project of the the late 1930s (among them Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, Ben Shahn, Russel Lee) would take dozens of frontal pictures of one of their sharecropper subjects until satisfied that they had gotten just the right look on film -- the precise expression on the subject's face that supported their own notions about poverty, light, dignity, exploitation, and geometry." (Sontag, 6)

About photography as art: "Since there were then no photographers, there could not be amateurs either, and taking photographs had no clear social use; it was gratuitous, that is, an artistic activity, though with few pretensions to being an art. It was only with its industrialization that photography came into its own as art. As industrialization provided social uses for the operations of the photographer, so the reaction against these uses reinforced the self-consciousness of photography-as-art." (Sontag, 8)

Masses use photography as a "social rite, a defense against anxiety, and a tool of power." (8)

"Photographs give people an imaginary possession of the past which is unreal" (9)









Two types of photographic:

Archival photography: Photos we take merely to record that we have been somewhere. No real focus on framing, less intentionality. Less thought about framing. Has increased with age of smartphones, point and shoot cameras. Our way of exerting power over an everchanging world. Being able to have a photographic memory (see case of Narrative)

Agetic photography: Photos we deliberately take in order to impose a particular vision of the world. Photos that we take for art's sake. Photos that are more intentional, taken for more than remembrance. (Art photography)

With the the increasingly miniturization of photographic technology and incorpration into our portble devices, the divide between archival and agetic photography becomes greater and greater. Archival photography becomes more of a photography in its own right. 

Sontag qoutes:

"Virtousi of the noble image like Alfred Stieglitz and Paul Strand, composing mighty, unforgettable photographs decade after decade, still want, first of all, to show something "out there," just like the Polaroid owner for whom photographs are a handy, fast form of note-taking, or the shutter-bug with a Brownie who takes snapshots as souvenirs of daily life." (Sontag, 6)

Here Sontag shows the distinction between agentic photography (one where photographs are deliberate, artistic formulations of the world) and archival (one where photos are taken in order to remember and catalog)

**Sontag says photos are a form of power that we exert over the world. Within this drive there exerts two types of photography, one that seeks to frame the world in beautiful and artistic ways (using the camera as a faculty for artistic production) and one which seeks to use the camera as a type of memory, something that can collect and archive all the moments, faces, and places we've been.** With the miniaturization and increasingly portability of cameras/intergration in our portable devices/camera less of object in its own right, the division between these two types of photography have been exacerbated. That is, whereas before one photographic device was used for both of these behaviors, now there is a larger separation between the kinds of cameras we use to take certain pictures. The separation has grown in that devices like the Narrative allow individuals to practice a completely undeliberate form of photography, while high quality cameras are only becoming a larger and larger market (give source)

One aspect of photography (the archival) is becoming increasingly autonomous and we are allowing devices to capture images for us. The devices even are trying to select out of the thousands of photos it takes, which ones are "Moments". Narrative uses the word "momentification" to describe the way its software distills lots of photos into Moments. So not only are we not taking photos any more, we are also allowing software to organize them and archive them for us. We are allowing software to do the organization that has been done in the past by photo albums.


Write:

- Add in sentance about Narrative being part of QS but not whole story
- Write paragraph about the difference between archival and agentic photography and how it is transforming the way we take pictures. Increasing divide between two types of photography. So what? What are the consequences? TURNS PHOTOGRAPHY INTO AN ORGAN, A PERMANENT EXTENSION OF THE BODY.  (Signals the technologization of the body...) 
- Show specifically in Sontag how shes defines photography as an event where we put ourselves between an object and the camera (pages 10-11). Narrative turns photography into passive act, rhetoric of being able to live your life, let the camera do the work for you. Sontag says photograph is non-interventionist  (bottom of 11) (Narrative changes that).


THE INDIFFERENT PHOTOGRAPH





